Combine inclusion fee and resource fee sections (#389)
stellar/stellar-docs: docs/learn/fundamentals/fees-resource-limits-metering.mdx

The resource fee depends on the following resources:

- **Instructions:** the number of CPU instructions the transaction uses, metered by the host environment;
- **Ledger entry accesses:** reading or writing any single ledger entry (any storage key in the contract context);
- **Ledger I/O:** the number of bytes read from or written to the ledger;
- **Transaction size:** the size of the transaction submitted to the network in bytes;
- **Events & return value size:** the size of the events produced by the contract and the return value of the top-level contract function — both events and return value are included in transaction metadata;

> - **Ledger space rent** the payment for the ledger entry TTL extensions (i.e., rent payments) and rent payments for increasing ledger entry size. Refer to the [state archival] section for more information about smart contract rent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Ledger space rent:** the payment for the ledger entry TTL extensions (i.e., rent payments) and rent payments for increasing ledger entry size. Refer to the [state archival](../smart-contract-internals/state-archival.mdx) section for more information about smart contract rent.
```

Resource limits are determined by a validator vote and can be adjusted based on network usage and ecosystem needs with a validator consensus.

Find current resource limits in the [Resource Limits & Fees](../../reference/resource-limits-fees.mdx) page in the Reference section.

## Inclusion fee

The inclusion fee is the maximum bid (a bid denotes a dynamic fee, meaning it varies based on certain network conditions) the submitter is willing to pay for the transaction to be included in the ledger. The inclusion fee equals the number of operations in the transaction multiplied by the effective base fee for the given ledger:

inclusion fee = # of operations \* effective base fee

**Effective base fee:** the fee required per operation for a transaction to make it to the ledger. This cannot be lower than 100 stroops per operation (the network minimum).

**Stroop:** the smallest unit of a lumen, one ten-millionth of a lumen (.0000001 XLM).

:::note

> Transactions can have up to 100 operations per transaction except for transactions that execute a smart contract. Smart contract transactions are only allowed one operation per transaction (unless the transaction is getting [fee-bumped](../encyclopedia/fee-bump-transactions.mdx); this would add another operation), and the limits are instead specified in CPU instructions and other limits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transactions can have up to 100 operations per transaction except for transactions that execute a smart contract. Smart contract transactions are only allowed one operation per transaction (unless the transaction is getting [fee-bumped](../encyclopedia/fee-bump-transactions.mdx); this would add another operation), and the limits are instead specified in CPU instructions and other resource limits.
```

:::

> When you set a base fee for a transaction, you are specifying the maximum amount you are willing to pay per operation in that transaction. This doesn’t necessarily mean you’ll pay that amount. You’ll only be charged the lowest amount needed for your transaction to make it to the ledger. If network traffic is light and the number of submitted operations or transactions is below the network ledger limit (configured by validators: currently 1,000 "classic" Stellar operations and 100 smart contract transactions), you will only pay the network minimum (configured by validators, currently 100 stroops).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you set a base fee for a transaction, you are specifying the maximum amount you are willing to pay per operation in that transaction. This doesn’t necessarily mean you’ll pay that amount. You’ll only be charged the lowest amount needed for your transaction to make it to the ledger. If network traffic is light and the number of submitted operations or transactions is below the network ledger limit (configured by validators: currently 1,000 non-smart-contract operations and 100 smart contract transactions), you will only pay the network minimum (configured by validators, currently 100 stroops).
```
I'm not sure of the best way to word this, but I think we're trying to avoid "classic" these days, right?

Author: You're right! I must have missed this one.

Alternatively, your transaction may not make it to the ledger if the effective base fee is higher than your base fee bid. When network traffic exceeds the ledger limit, the network enters into [surge pricing mode](#surge-pricing), and your effective base fee becomes your maximum bid.

Fees are deducted from the source account unless there is a fee-bump transaction that states otherwise. Learn about fee-bump transactions in the [Fee-Bump Transaction section](../encyclopedia/fee-bump-transactions.mdx).

## Surge and dynamic pricing

### Surge pricing

> The network can enter surge pricing mode under two circumstances: 1. when the number of operations submitted to a ledger exceeds the network capacity (on Mainnet: 1,000 operations for transactions that do not execute smart contracts), or 2. if there is competition between smart contract transactions for a particular resource (instructions, ledger entry accesses (reads and writes), ledger IO (bytes read and bytes written), and the total size of transactions to be applied). During this time, the network uses market dynamics to decide which transactions to include in the ledger. Transactions that offer a higher maximum base fee bid make it to the ledger first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The network can enter surge pricing mode under two circumstances: 1. when the number of operations submitted to a ledger exceeds the network capacity (1,000 operations for transactions that do not execute smart contracts), or 2. if there is competition between smart contract transactions for a particular resource (instructions, ledger entry accesses (reads and writes), ledger IO (bytes read and bytes written), and the total size of transactions to be applied). During this time, the network uses market dynamics to decide which transactions to include in the ledger. Transactions that offer a higher maximum base fee bid make it to the ledger first.
```

> During surge pricing mode, transactions are sorted based on their inclusion fee amount, and the user pays the minimum inclusion fee in their transaction set. For example, if there are five transactions with respective inclusion fees of 2, 3, 4, 4, and 5 XLM, and only four of them make it to the ledger, then all included transactions pay the inclusion fee of 3 XLM. If all five transactions made it to the ledger (which would take it out of surge pricing mode), each would pay the minimum inclusion fee of 100 stroops (.0001 XLM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During surge pricing mode, transactions are sorted based on their inclusion fee amount, and the user pays the minimum inclusion fee in their transaction set. For example, if there are five transactions with respective inclusion fees of 2, 3, 4, 4, and 5 XLM, and only four of them an make it to the ledger, then all included transactions pay the inclusion fee of 3 XLM. If all five transactions can make it to the ledger (which would mean the network is not in surge pricing mode), each would pay the minimum inclusion fee of 100 stroops (.0001 XLM).
```

If there are multiple transactions offering the same inclusion fee, but they cannot all fit into the ledger, transactions are picked randomly so that the total operations for the entire set don’t exceed 1,000. The rest of the transactions are pushed to the next ledger or discarded if they’ve been waiting for too long. If your transaction is discarded, Horizon will return a timeout error.

:::note

> It is recommended to apply [ledger bounds](./stellar-data-structures/operations-and-transactions#ledger-bounds) or [time bounds](./stellar-data-structures/operations-and-transactions#time-bounds) to transactions — either your transaction makes it to the ledger or fails, depending on your time and/or ledger parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to apply [ledger bounds](./stellar-data-structures/operations-and-transactions.mdx#ledger-bounds) or [time bounds](./stellar-data-structures/operations-and-transactions.mdx#time-bounds) to transactions — either your transaction makes it to the ledger or fails, depending on your time and/or ledger parameters.
```

:::

**You are more likely to pay a higher inclusion fee when submitting smart contract transactions.** Smart contract transactions have tighter ledger limits than transactions that don’t interact with smart contracts and will therefore experience surge pricing more often. You are more likely to pay your maximum inclusion fee bid or, at least, the minimum inclusion fee bid in your transaction set. So, you must plan your fee bidding strategy accordingly.

### Dynamic pricing for storage

> Stellar’s storage database size is determined by two forces: the rate of addition (writes) and the rate of deletions (evictions). Stellar has set a ledger growth threshold to some constant (the `BucketListTargetSizeBytes` network parameter, implemented to prevent explosive state growth and subject to change based on validator vote). Because there is a fixed capacity, write fees are based on the ledger size and can alter dynamically based on that size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stellar’s storage database size is determined by two forces: the rate of additions (writes) and the rate of deletions (evictions). Stellar has set a ledger growth threshold to a constant value (the `BucketListTargetSizeBytes` network parameter, implemented to prevent explosive state growth and subject to change based on validator vote). Because there is a fixed capacity, write fees are based on the ledger size and can alter dynamically based on that size.
```

> When the ledger size is large, there is a higher demand for storage space, which causes a higher write fee. Over time, entries are evicted, reducing the size and, thereby, reducing storage pricing. This fee model is designed as if the database represents the current demand for storage at any given instant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the ledger size is large, there is a higher demand for storage space, which causes a higher write fee. Over time, entries are archived, reducing the overall ledger size and, thereby, reducing storage pricing. This fee model is designed as if the database size represents the current demand for storage at any given instant.
```

> Write fees will grow gradually over time when the database size is below the ledger growth threshold and will grow linearly, but with a 1,000x factor after exceeding that threshold. This is a safeguard against spam and should not happen under normal circumstances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write fees will grow gradually over time when the database size is below the ledger growth threshold and will grow linearly, but with a 1,000x factor after exceeding that threshold. This is a safeguard against spam and is not anticipated under normal circumstances.
```

## Metering

Metering is a mechanism in the host environment that accounts for the resource costs incurred during the execution of a smart contract. The outcomes of metering act as the canonical truth of a smart contract’s execution cost and serve as an input for fee computations.

> Stellar’s smart contract execution environment comprises a host and a guest. The host encapsulates shared functionalities for all contracts, including host objects, functions, and a Wasm interpreter (VM). The guest environment is where the compiled Wasm contract is interpreted and executed. A detailed discussion of these environments can be found in [Environment Concepts](https://developers.stellar.org/docs/learn/smart-contract-internals/environment-concepts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stellar’s smart contract execution environment comprises a host and a guest. The host encapsulates shared functionalities for all contracts, including host objects, functions, and a Wasm interpreter (VM). The guest environment is where the compiled Wasm contract is interpreted and executed. A detailed discussion of these environments can be found in [Environment Concepts](../smart-contract-internals/environment-concepts.mdx).
```

### Cost types

Metering is segmented into host components, referred to as **cost types**. Each cost type can be viewed as a “meta instruction” symbolizing a specific host operation with a known complexity that depends on a runtime input. For instance, cost type `ComputeSha256Hash` represents the cost of computing the SHA256 hash of a byte array.

:::info

Execution of Wasm instructions is accounted for as a host cost type `WasmInsnExec`, which has a constant CPU cost per Wasm instruction. This methodology treats guest instructions and host executions equivalently.

:::

Find a complete list of host cost types and their definitions here: [`ContractCostType`](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-xdr/blob/e372df9f677961aac04c5a4cc80a3667f310b29f/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x#L92-L155).

### Cost parameters

Cost types are carefully selected to:

1. Serve as comprehensive building blocks for all significant contract execution costs;

> 2. Ensure each component cost increases at most linearly (i.e., constant or linear) with respect to its input. That is, y = a + bx, where y is the cost output, x is the input, and a & b are the constant and linear model parameters, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Ensure each component cost increases at most linearly (i.e., constant or linear) with respect to its input. That is, `y = a + bx`, where `y` is the cost output, `x` is the input, and `a` & `b` are the constant and linear model parameters, respectively.
```

Each cost type has a separate model for both resource types (CPU and memory).

> The parameters for each model, a and b, are calibrated and fitted offline against inputs of various sizes. The collection of all model cost parameters from the network configurable entries (see [ConfigSettingsEntry](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-xdr/blob/e372df9f677961aac04c5a4cc80a3667f310b29f/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x#L223-L226) can be updated through network consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameters for each model, `a` and `b`, are calibrated and fitted offline against inputs of various sizes. The collection of all model cost parameters from the network configurable entries (see [`ConfigSettingsEntry`](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-xdr/blob/e372df9f677961aac04c5a4cc80a3667f310b29f/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x#L223-L226) can be updated through network consensus.
```

During execution, whenever a component (a code block defining a cost type) is encountered, the corresponding model computes the resource output from the runtime input and increments the meter accordingly. The meter checks the cumulative consumption against the budget limit. If the limit is exceeded, an error is produced, and execution is terminated.

If the contract execution concludes within the specified resource limits, the metered total of CPU instructions is recorded and utilized as the input for fee calculation. While memory usage is not included in the fee computation, it is nevertheless subject to the resource limits.

## Inclusion fee pricing strategies

There are three primary methods to deal with inclusion fee fluctuations and surge pricing:

- [**Method 1:**](#set-the-highest-fee-youre-comfortable-paying) set the highest fee you’re comfortable paying. This does not mean that you’ll pay that amount on every transaction — you will only pay what’s necessary to get into the ledger. Under normal (non-surge) circumstances, you will only pay the standard fee even with a higher maximum fee set. This method is simple, convenient, and efficient but can still potentially fail.

> - [**Method 2:**](#fee-bumps-on-past-transactions) resubmit a transaction with a higher fee using a fee-bump transaction

Reviewer: Are we missing a third method in this list?

Author: We had one, but it was decided that it was no longer relevant in the Google doc.

<CodeExample>

```js
// Let `lastTx` be some transaction that fails submission due to high fees, and
// `lastFee` be the maximum fee (expressed as an int) willing to be paid by
// `account` for `lastTx`.
server.submitTransaction(lastTx).catch(function (error) {
  if (isFeeError(error)) {
    let bump = sdk.TransactionBuilder.buildFeeBumpTransaction(
      account,      // account that will PAY the new fee
      lastFee * 10, // new fee
      lastTx,       // the (entire) failing transaction
      server.networkPassphrase
    );
    bump.sign(someAccount);
    return server.submitTransaction(bump);
  }
  // ...other error conditions...
}).then(...);
```

</CodeExample>

Suppose you submit two distinct transactions with the same source account and sequence number; the second transaction is a fee-bump transaction. In that case, the second transaction will be included in the transaction queue, replacing the first transaction if and only if the fee bid of the second transaction is at least 10x the fee bid of the first transaction.

> This value can typically be found in the fee_charged field of the transaction response under the `tx_insufficient_fee` error case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This value can typically be found in the `fee_charged` field of the transaction response under the `tx_insufficient_fee` error case.
```
